---
layout: post
title: The Devious Developer
---

# Get Devious

The Devious Developer blog is here to give you tips to become a great engineer in whatever work environment you're involved with.  Whether you're working on undefined or undocumented functionality using largely your own best judgement to make important decisions at a start-up company or tied up in red tape, drowning in a sea of unnecessary documentation where decisions are passed down from above at a giant corporation, becoming a great software developer is not only possible, but absolutely necessary.

If your work environment is not conducive to performing at the height of your ability, you have 3 options:

### 1. Let your environment change you

Give up your passion for software development.  Remember the last time you were obsessed with a difficult problem you were determined to solve?  You researched information for similar problems, you tried solution after solution only to find failure waiting for you.  You persist until, eventually, you find and implement the perfect solution and look upon it with pride.

Those days are gone forevermore.  You will do as you're told, implementing features according to an executive or business person's whim and never thinking for yourself.  Not only do you never think for yourself, you never even *think* to think for yourself!  Why would you do that when someone tells you what to do and you have no choice in the matter!?

In the immortal words of the greatest rock band in history:

> If you choose not to decide, you still have made a choice

### 2. Change your environment

Your second choice is to change your environment.  This is not as easy as it sounds, despite the fact that it sounds daunting to begin with, especially in a large corporate environment.  People are stuck in their ways, slow to change and resistant to anything different.  How do you change people who refuse to change?  You can't just tell them that your new system or solution is better, that isn't good enough to justify their exit of the comfort zone and tedious necessity to expand their knowledge.

Take a lesson from improv comedy - **Show, don't tell**.

Implement your plan, even if not given explicit permission.  If you're even considering an attempt to change your environment, it's very likely that you're a high performing employee.  Use that to your advantage by implementing your system with the extra productivity you have because of your high performance.  Instead of cranking out more code to make yourself look even more effective, take some of that time into implementing your new ideas.

You think automation is the future, but your company doesn't want to invest in it?  Perfect, start automating some small piece of your job in your "spare" time.  Once you have something automated, you will have freed up even more of your time and you can automate something else.  Once you have something that will raise eyebrows, present your work to your peers and encourage they start using it as well.  You have now freed up some of their time and they can help you automate even more things.  By the time the "higher ups" find out about the project, you will be able to **SHOW** its value instead of trying to sell it with hypothetical descriptions.

### 3. Move to a new environment

If you have tried and failed several times to implement your vision for a great environment and your company makes it clear they will not change, it's time to move on.  Move on before your environment changes you because every time that happens, you will lose a little more of your passion, a little more of your vision and drive and you will die on the inside just a little bit.  Let that happen once and it will continue to happen.  Your environment treats you how you let it treat you.  Make a stand when something in your environment is unacceptable and if the environment refuses to change, you have the choice to leave.

When looking for a new environment, make sure to ask designed and pointed questions to find out if this new environment is closer to your vision, or, at the very least, whether the environment is more likely to change in response to your vision.  If there is literally nowhere that will support your vision, it's time for some self-analysis.

Out of many companies, people and existing environments, none want to implement my vision.  Does that mean my vision is flawed?  Or, is it so revolutionary that it could change the world, but nobody is willing to take the risk of losing what is currently in place?  If you are determined that your vision is a vision of the future that could change an industry, change a country or change the world, it is your civic duty to implement it for yourself.  Start your own company.  Start a non-profit.  Move to a different state or a different country that may be less resistant to your vision.  Never give up.  Never surrender.

## The Prince

Machiavelli wrote his book, _The Prince_, as an instruction manual for leadership for the Florentine governor, Lorenzo de’ Medici.  The Medici family had many political enemies, several of whom conspired against Lorenzo during his rise to power, murdering his brother in the process.  Lorenzo barely escaped with his life.

_The Prince_ was not intended to be a guide for malevolent, brutal dictators to control populations and attack their enemies - they wouldn't be brutal dictators in the first place if they needed direction in that regard.  Instead, it was intended to be a book of strategies and warnings for a benevolent leader - The Prince - who was inclined to behave in a "politically correct" - predictable - manner.  The Prince, Machiavelli believed, was an especially good target for manipulation and control by those whose morals are not so noble.  Thus, in order for these great leaders to realize their vision, they need to take some lessons from their counterparts and allow themselves to behave in a more devious manner.

You should take a lesson from Machiavelli as well.  Don't allow your political enemies to undermine you.  Don't be powerless in the face of adversity.  Take control as a leader and make sure your benevolence and goodwill are firmly established and your vision for the future will become a reality.

